% status: 0
% chapter: Mobile App

\title{Conspectus of Firebase Cloud Services}


\author{kadupitiya Kadupitige}
\orcid{1234-5678-9012}
\affiliation{%
  \institution{Indiana University}
  \streetaddress{Smith Research Center}
  \city{Bloomington} 
  \state{IN} 
  \postcode{47408}
}
\email{jasakadu@iu.edu}

\author{Gregor von Laszewski}
\affiliation{%
  \institution{Indiana University}
  \streetaddress{Smith Research Center}
  \city{Bloomington} 
  \state{IN} 
  \postcode{47408}
  \country{USA}}
\email{laszewski@gmail.com}


% The default list of authors is too long for headers}
\renewcommand{\shortauthors}{G. v. Laszewski}


\begin{abstract}
With the expedite development of cloud technologies and infrastructure,
computing resources have become more powerful and more available than ever
before. Developers have a tedious job of deciding what kind of technology is
well suited for their application among varieties of cloud technologies. In this
extended abstract, the possibilities of exploring the Firebase cloud services and most of
the tools and services which comes under Firebase are studied. This abstract tries
to help developers by reporting the advantages and disadvantages of using
Firebase cloud services.
\footnote{This abstract does not say what Firebase is. I propose to delete it and focus to let the user know what firebase is}
\end{abstract}

\keywords{hid-sp18-409, Firebase, Google, Cloud technologies}


\maketitle


\section{Introduction}

Firebase is globally identified as a reliable, open source project and a
first-class citizen in the Google ecosystem~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase}.
Firebase cloud services started as an online chat message service and soon
expanded to provide cloud services such as Firebase cloud messaging, Firebase
auth, realtime database, Firebase storage, Firebase hosting, Firebase test lab
for Android and iOS and Firebase crash
reporting~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-official}. The latest version of
Firebase provides an unified cloud platform to build Android, iOS, and web
Apps~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-official}.  Admob, Analytics,
Authentication, Indexing, Test Lab, and Push Notifications are few important
features introduced in the latest release of
Firebase~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-official}.

The organization of the extended abstract is as follows. In section II, a history about
Firebase cloud services are presented. Section III provides a detailed
description of the clould services provided by Firebase. Usage, pricing and
summary are elaborated in sections IV, V and VI, respectively.

\section{History}

Firebase cloud services was started as a startup called Envolve by James Tamplin
and Andrew Lee in 2011~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-wikipedia}. At the
beginning Envolve only provided an API which allowed web developers to integrate
real-time chat functionality with any web applications using java
scripts~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase}. Later, James Tamplin and Andrew Lee
had observed that developers had started to use real-time chat functionality to
sync data in real-time among users in applications like online games. This
interesting discovery led Firebase cloud services to be launched as a new
company to provide real-time back-end clould services in
2012~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-wikipedia}. Series of fund raising programs
were conducted by Firebase and had raised 12.6 million dollars to expand the
back-end cloud services in 2012 to 2013~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase}.
Firebase was acquired by Google when it had more than 110,000 active developers
on its platform  at the end of 2014~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-acquired}.
After the acquisition, Firebase has grown rapidly inside Google's resources and
technical infrastructure to scale as a much faster and reliable back-end cloud
service which can store and sync data instantly to build realtime apps for iOS,
Android and the web. Simultaneously, Google had stopped supporting their cloud
messaging services and merged it with Firebase cloud messaging
services~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-merged}. Due to these facts, Firebase
has rapidly evolved into a multifunctional mobile and web application
development cloud platform which it is
today~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-official}.

\section{Firebase Services}

Firebase cloud services could be broadly categorized into two groups such as
development and testing services and audience growing and engaging services
considering the use cases of the
services~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-products}. Components of Firebase cloud
services are shown in Figure \ref{fig:firebase}. This study focused on these
Firebase services, and hence, they are discussed in this section.

\begin{figure}[htb]
	\centering\includegraphics[width=\columnwidth]{../images/firebase.JPG}
	\caption{ Components of Firebase cloud services 
		\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase}}
	\label{fig:firebase}
\end{figure}

\subsection{Development and testing services}

\subsubsection{Realtime Database} The Firebase Realtime Database is a
cloud-hosted, NoSQL database to store and sync data between Mobile and web
application in realtime. This NoSQL Realtime Database is a really big JSON
object structure which could be managed in
realtime~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-wikipedia,
	hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-products}. Firebase database is easily plugable 
	and
any application could hold current value of the data and any updates to that
using a single API as data updates syncs across connected devices in
milliseconds. Highlighted advantages for Realtime Database are serverless app
support, optimized for offline use, strong user-based security and part of the
Google echo system~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-products}.

\subsubsection{Crashlytics} Crashlytics is a crash reporting services provided
by Firebase technologies to reduce troubleshooting time by turning crash reports
into a manageable list of issues to allow bug fixes in
realtime~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-products}. Crashlytics dashboard
provides more insights for the developers to identify which issues should be
prioritized based on user impact. Identified advantages are quickness in
identifying root cause of crashes, prioritized issues and realtime alerts for
crashes~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-products}. Crashlytics is the successor
for Firebase Crash Reporting service and currently in beta state.

\subsubsection{Crash Reporting} Firebase Crash Reporting service is the
predecessor for Crashlytics and moving to the deprecated state. Pinpointed
advantages were easy integration, clustered and prioritized errors and version
based problem identification~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-products}.

\subsubsection{Cloud Firestore} Cloud Firestore is the successor for Firebase
Realtime Database service and currently in beta state. Firestore is also a
cloud-hosted, NoSQL database to store and sync data between users at a global
scale. Highlighted advantages are enhanced query and data structures, enabling
truly serverless apps,  syncing data across devices, on or offline and
scalability ~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-official,
	hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-products}.

\subsubsection{Authentication} Firebase Authentication is an open source
authentication service which consist of easily plugable SDKs and ready-made user
interface libraries to authenticate users in iOS, Android and the web
applications. Firebase Auth allows different methods to authenticate such as
email-password, Google, Facebook and Twitter using 10 lines of code, including
complex operations like account
merging~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-products}. Heavily endorsed attributes
of the Firebase Auth are flexible, drop-in user interfaces, comprehensive
security and fast implementation~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-wikipedia}.

\subsubsection{Cloud Functions} Cloud functions enables true server-less
applications by deploying a custom backend code as a Firebase Cloud function
which could be triggered by any Firebase product such as Cloud Messaging. Main
advantages of Cloud functions are server-less application support, low
maintenance and enabling high security for business
logic~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-products}.

\subsubsection{Cloud Storage} Firebase Cloud storage allows developers to store
and share application generated content such as multimedia items via an object
storage in Google scale regardless of network quality with high security. Major
advantages of using Firebase Cloud Storage are scalability at Google scale,
robust uploads and downloads and strong user-based
security~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-products}.

\subsubsection{Hosting} Hosting service offers fast and reliable web hosting for
modern web applications using Solid-state drives(SSDs) inside Content Delivery
Network(CDN) edge servers all around the world. This service provides free SSL
certificates for custom domains~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase,
	hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-products}.

\subsubsection{Test Lab for Android } Firebase Test Labs allows developers to
utilize large number of mobile test devices to test android applications by
executing automatic and customized tests on virtual and physical devices
maintained by Google. Pinpointed advantages for Test Lab service are easy
integration with existing work flows, test any mobile application with zero or
minimal coding and availability of wide range of devices for beta
testing~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-products}.

\subsubsection{Performance Monitoring} Performance Monitoring service enables
tracing and diagnosing the performance of specified components of the mobile
application with zero or minimal coding effort inside the Firebase console as a
detailed or summarized view. Key fact about Monitoring service is that it allows
to keep the eyes on network behavior and pinpoint the origin of issues in mobile
application~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-products}.


\subsection{Audience growing and engaging services}

\subsubsection{Google Analytics} Google Analytic service is distributed under
the Firebase services and it allows developers to analyze user behaviours in
real-time to do important decision making~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase}. It
also allows to export user behaviours to Google BigQuery to do advanced
analysis. Few important facts of Google Analytics are capturing user insights
from acquisition to app usage, attribution across dozens of sources,
segmentation and optimization in one dashboard and real-time
analytics~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-products}.

\subsubsection{Cloud Messaging} Firebase Cloud Messaging (FCM) is the most used
Firebase service among all the services as it provides a reliable and
energy-efficient messages and push notifications on iOS, Android, and the web at
no cost~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-products}. Developer has the control
over to configure these messages so that it could be sent to a single devices,
groups of devices, or specific topics or user segments. Advantages associated
with FCM are advanced message targeting, customizable notification content,
minimal coding required for configuring or sending notifications, scalability up
to hundreds of billions of messages per day and A/B test
notifications~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-merged,
	hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-products}.

\subsubsection{Predictions} Firebase Prediction services runs on top of Firbase
Analytics services to make predictions to create dynamic user groups based on
different user behaviours using Google's machine learning capabilities. Created
user groups could be then used for sending smart and filtered notifications and
messages without worrying about different content filtering mechanisms.
Highlighted content for Prediction services is creating customized user
experiences using smarter
notifications~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-products}.

\subsubsection{Dynamic Links} Dynamic Links allows developers to deliver a
customized user experience by providing deep links to navigate users to the
right place inside iOS, Android, and the web application. Few advantages comes
with Dynamic Link activation are converting mobile web users to native
application users, increasing conversion for user-to-user sharing, allowing more
installs with social, email, and SMS marketing campaigns and converting desktop
users into mobile application users~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-wikipedia,
	hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-products}.

\subsubsection{Remote Config} Firebase Remote Config service allows developers
to customize the look and feel of the application for individual users or user
groups based on their behaviours. It also enables roll out features gradually,
run A/B tests and customized content filtering without having to deploy and
install new version of the
application~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-products}.

\subsubsection{Invites} Invites service enables in app sharing using referral
codes via email or SMS. It collaboratively works with Google analytics to
provide feedback to the developer about invites such as user has opened or
installed an application via an Invite~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-products,
	hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-invite}.

\subsubsection{App Indexing} Firebase App Indexing uses Google Search
integration to engage users with a particular application when searched for
related content. If the application is already installed, open card will be
appeared. If it is not installed, an installation card will be shown.
Highlighted advantages of using App Indexing service are improving your ranking
on Search, attraction of new users and increasing revenue with better in-app ad
targeting~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-products}.

\subsubsection{AdMob} Firebase AdMod service allows developers to implement
monetization strategies inside the application to earn money by showcasing
engaging ads to the application audience~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-admob}.

\subsubsection{AdWords} Adwords service enables advertisement about the
application  sharing across Google search to target filtered or not filtered
user segments defined inside Google
Analytics~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-adwords}.

\section{Usage} Firebase could services are trusted by many popular applications
such as Doodle\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-doodle}, American
Express\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-americanexpress}, The New York
Times\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-nytimes}, NPRone\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-npr},
Shazam\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-shazam}, Duolingo\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-duolingo},
Alibaba\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-alibaba}, Lyft\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-lyft},
Venmo\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-venmo}, The
Economist\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-economist},
Trivago\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-trivago}, CTrip\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-ctrip},
WattPad\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-wattpad}, KCB\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-kcbgroup},
Halfbrick\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-halfbrick},
Rockbite\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-rockbitegames},
Onefootball\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-onefootball},
Fabulous\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-thefabulous} and many
more~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase,hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-usecases}.
According to the Firebase product review reports following applications are
highlighted to showcase the use cases of Firebase cloud services.

\begin{itemize} \item Doodle had increased their user engagement by 42 percent
	after using Firebase Crashlytics and Remote Config
	services~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-doodle, hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-usecases}.
	
	\item American Express was able to reduce application load testing cost by 
	half
	after integrating Firebase Test Lab~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-americanexpress}.
	
	\item KCB Group was able to reduce the application cost per install by 24
	percent after utilizing Google Analytics for
	Firebase~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-kcbgroup, 
	hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-usecases}.
	
	\item Halfbrick game studio was able to increase 7-day retention rate from
	25percent to 30 percent after integrating Firebase Predictions with Remote
	Config to provide in-app promotion to 
	users~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-halfbrick,
		hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-usecases}.
	
	\item Rockbite Games development platform was able to boost application 
	revenue
	up to 25 percent by integrating Firebase Predictions to optimize the digital
	store user interface for users who were most likely to make an in-app
	purchases~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-rockbitegames}.
	
	\item NPR application is integrated Firebase Remote Config, Analytics and
	BigQuer to gain much smarter targeting and
	insights~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-usecases}. \end{itemize}

\section{Pricing} There are 19 Firebase cloud services offered by Google and 12
services are completely free of charge. Free services are Authentication (except
Phone Auth), Analytics, Predictions, App Indexing, Dynamic Links, Invites,
Remote Config, Cloud Messaging, Performance Monitoring, Crash Reporting, and
Crashlytics ~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-pricing}. Rest of the services such
as Realtime Database, Cloud Firestore, Storage, Cloud Functions, Phone Auth,
Hosting, and Test Lab are offered under three different price packages as
described below~\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase-pricing}.

\begin{itemize} \item Spark plan: Free plan with bandwidth and speed
	limitations. \item Flame plan: \$25 per month plan with much higher 
	bandwidth
	and speed limitations . \item Blaze plan: Calculate the price based on the
	usage. \end{itemize}

\section{summary} This extended abstract focused on investigating technical aspects of
Firebase cloud technologies and its usages. According to the understanding gain
from the review, it is evident that Firebase cloud technologies has everything
needed to build and grow Android, iOS, and web applications, all in one place.
As James \cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase}, the founder of Firebase stated, push
notification support for Android and iOS mobile application is recently
identified as the most famous feature of Firebase cloud services. Firebase cloud
services are currently being used by many popular applications and it has more
than 10 Million active developers on its platform  at the end of
2016\cite{hid-sp18-409-www-firebase}.

\begin{acks}
	
	The authors would like to thank Dr.~Gregor~von~Laszewski for his support and
	suggestions to write this extended abstract.
	
\end{acks}

\bibliographystyle{ACM-Reference-Format}
\bibliography{report} 

